README.md, before:

# Airtable API Proxy
Sets up a cache proxy server for querying the [Earth Science Online Video Database](https://airtable.com/shrFBKQwGjstk7TVn), via the Airtable API, and provides methods for then back-syncing with a Zotero library (now available to the public [here](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2764885/esovdb/library)).  Also includes methods for syncing with Zotero directly from updates or new records in Airtable, which can be set up with Airtable's automation (see below).

Built as the server-side of [avanavana/zotero-esovdb](https://github.com/avanavana/zotero-esovdb).

Forked from [daniloc/airtable-api-proxy](https://github.com/daniloc/airtable-api-proxy). I refactored this pretty heavilly to tailor it to the ESOVDB's needs, but you can clone or fork this for a quick start on your own Airtable API cache proxy.

BYODOTENV with your Airtable API key and base ID, and adapt to your own fields, and Zotero Key and User if you also need a proxy server for the Zotero API (my implementation doesn't need caching as it's all create or update actions, but adding caching is trivial as the cache module included is built to work with any endpoint provided). See the `sample.env` file provided, replace with your data, and rename to `.env`.

I built a set of helper functions for transforming select Airtable data into Zotero-compatible formats (again, the ultimate destination in my own usage), as well as some utility functions and middleware to either whitelist or blacklist IPs, which you can keep as a space-separated string with wildcards, also in your dotenv.  Most files have inline, JSDoc-style documentation.

## Usage
Run with `npm start` (or better yet, install [`pm2`](https://github.com/Unitech/pm2), my preference, or [`nodemon`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/nodemon) and run it with those to keep it alive).

- Cache proxy with rate limiting via [`bottleneck`](https://github.com/SGrondin/bottleneck)
- Takes optional `maxRequests` & `pageSize` URL query params (Airtable limits the latter to 100)
- Fetch a specific page of records by adding an optional `/:pg` param (0-indexed) after the `api/list` endpoint
- Takes `modifiedAfter` or `createdAfter` URL query params to fetch records modified or created after a specified date/time
- Supply a list of space-separated IP addresses with optional wildcards (e.g. 255.255.\*.\*) in your dotenv or elsewhere and limit access to endpoints by passing included middleware
- Sync updates you download from Airtable with a Zotero library.

I will probably not update the guts too much more after the last item above, because this is meant to be a lightweight solution and it already works well and soon will fulfill all my own requirements.

## Pre-configured Endpoints
I built this for my own needs, and the following are the endpoints I use, but these can be removed or adapted to your own needs for any Airtable implementation alone, or with additional synchronization to Zotero, as I do.

### `GET` /esovdb/videos/list/:pg?
Retrieves a list of records from a specified table (optional view) on Airtable, page by page, as Airtable requires, using [`bottleneck`](https://github.com/SGrondin/bottleneck) to avoid rate-limiting, and sends the final result of all requested records as JSON. All requests are cached (cache expiration is parameterized) using the server's file system, according to the structure of the query and any additional URL params. The `/:pg?` parameter, as indicated, is optional, and allows you to query a specific page of the results, skipping all others.Gets

**Additional URL Query Params:**
- `maxRequests` – Synonymous with the Airtable API's `maxRequests` param—limits the total results returned. (default: all records)
- `pageSize` – Synonymous with the Airtable API's `pageSize` param—the number of records to return with each paged request to the Airtable API.  Airtable limits this to 100 per page. (default: 100 records)
- `modifiedAfter` – Creates a `filterByFormula` param in the Airtable API request that retrieves records modified after a certain date (most date strings work, uses `Date.parse()`)
- `createdAfter` – Creates a `filterByFormula` param in the Airtable API request that retrieves records created after a certain date (most date strings work, uses `Date.parse()`)

### `POST` /esovdb/videos/update
Updates one or more records on a specified table on Airtable.  The body of this post request should be an array of objects formatted as per the Airtable API spec:
```javascript
[
  { 
    id: 'recordID',
    fields: {
      'Airtable Field': 'value',
      ...
    }
  },
  ...
]
```
Processes as many records as you give it in batches of 50, as Airtable requires using [`bottleneck`](https://github.com/SGrondin/bottleneck) to avoid rate-limiting.

### `POST` /zotero
Adds items to a Zotero Library, 50 at a time, at a maximum of 6/min, which is the Zotero API's limit.  I use this endpoint combined with Airtable's automations feature to automatically add items to my Zotero library every time a new record is created in Airtable.  My implementation further back-syncs the newly created item in Zotero with the originating table in Airtable, so that each record in Airtable has a Zotero key and version that I can use to track updates later.

**Sample Airtable Script for Automation**

*Note: when using Airtable's automations, you will have to set up your input.config() object to match all the fields you want to send in the Airtable script below*

```javascript
/**
 *  @trigger Videos › onCreateRecord
 *  @desc Syncs added record on Zotero via ESOVDB proxy server and then syncs back to ESOVDB with assigned key and version
*/

const data = input.config();

if (data.status === 'active') {
    const record = {
        title: data.title,
        url: data.url,
        year: data.year,
        desc: data.desc,
        runningTime: data.runningTime,
        format: data.format,
        topic: data.topic,
        learnMore: data.learnMore,
        series: data.series,
        seriesCount: data.seriesCount,
        vol: data.vol,
        no: data.no,
        publisher: data.publisher,
        presentersFirstName: data.presenterFn,
        presentersLastName: data.presenterLn,
        language: data.language,
        location: data.location,
        plusCode: data.plusCode,
        provider: data.provider,
        esovdbId: data.esovdbid,
        recordId: data.id,
        accessDate: data.isoAdded,
        created: data.created,
        modified: data.modified
    };

    let response = await fetch('https://your-proxy-server.com/zotero', {
        method: 'POST',
        body: JSON.stringify(record),
        headers: {
            'Content-Type': 'application/json',
        },
    });

    if (response.status === 200) {
        console.log('Successfully added item to Zotero and synced version on ESOVDB.');
    } else {
        console.error('Error adding item to Zotero or syncing version on ESOVDB.')
    }
}
```

### `PUT` /zotero
Exactly the same as `POST`, functionally, but the separate endpoint lets me log different types of requests for my own records.  Adds items to a Zotero Library, 50 at a time, at a maximum of 6/min, which is the Zotero API's limit.  I use this endpoint combined with Airtable's automations feature to automatically add items to my Zotero library every time a new record is created in Airtable.  My implementation further back-syncs the newly created item in Zotero with the originating table in Airtable, so that each record in Airtable has a Zotero key and version that I can use to track updates later.

**Sample Airtable Script for Automation**
*Note: when using Airtable's automations, you will have to set up your input.config() object to match all the fields you want to send in the Airtable script below*

```javascript
/**
 *  @trigger Videos › onUpdateRecord
 *  @desc Syncs updated record on Zotero via ESOVDB proxy server and then syncs back to ESOVDB with new version
*/

const data = input.config();

if (data.status === 'active') {
    const record = {
        zoteroKey: data.zoteroKey,
        zoteroVersion: data.zoteroVersion,
        title: data.title,
        url: data.url,
        year: data.year,
        desc: data.desc,
        runningTime: data.runningTime,
        format: data.format,
        topic: data.topic,
        learnMore: data.learnMore,
        series: data.series,
        seriesCount: data.seriesCount,
        vol: data.vol,
        no: data.no,
        publisher: data.publisher,
        presentersFirstName: data.presenterFn,
        presentersLastName: data.presenterLn,
        language: data.language,
        location: data.location,
        plusCode: data.plusCode,
        provider: data.provider,
        esovdbId: data.esovdbid,
        recordId: data.id,
        accessDate: data.isoAdded,
        created: data.created,
        modified: data.modified
    };

    let response = await fetch('https://your-proxy-server.com/zotero', {
        method: 'PUT',
        body: JSON.stringify(record),
        headers: {
            'Content-Type': 'application/json',
        },
    });

    if (response.status === 200) {
        console.log('Successfully updated item on Zotero and synced version on ESOVDB.');
    } else {
        console.error('Error updating item on Zotero or syncing version on ESOVDB.')
    }
}
```

MIT
Copyright (c) 2020-2021 Avana Vana

Commit message:

Refactored code, now works with public ESOVDB library, topic & series subcollections

README.md, after:

# Airtable API Proxy
Sets up a cache proxy server for querying the [Earth Science Online Video Database](https://airtable.com/shrFBKQwGjstk7TVn), via the Airtable API, and provides methods for then back-syncing with a Zotero library (now available to the public [here](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2764885/esovdb/library)).  Also includes methods for syncing with Zotero directly from updates or new records in Airtable, which can be set up with Airtable's automation (see below).

Built as the server-side of [avanavana/zotero-esovdb](https://github.com/avanavana/zotero-esovdb).

Forked from [daniloc/airtable-api-proxy](https://github.com/daniloc/airtable-api-proxy). I refactored this pretty heavilly to tailor it to the ESOVDB's needs, but you can clone or fork this for a quick start on your own Airtable API cache proxy.

BYODOTENV with your Airtable API key and base ID, and adapt to your own fields, and Zotero Key and User if you also need a proxy server for the Zotero API (my implementation doesn't need caching as it's all create or update actions, but adding caching is trivial as the cache module included is built to work with any endpoint provided). See the `sample.env` file provided, replace with your data, and rename to `.env`.

I built a set of helper functions for transforming select Airtable data into Zotero-compatible formats (again, the ultimate destination in my own usage), as well as some utility functions and middleware to either whitelist or blacklist IPs, which you can keep as a space-separated string with wildcards, also in your dotenv.  Most files have inline, JSDoc-style documentation.

## Usage
Run with `npm start` (or better yet, install [`pm2`](https://github.com/Unitech/pm2), my preference, or [`nodemon`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/nodemon) and run it with those to keep it alive).

- Cache proxy with rate limiting via [`bottleneck`](https://github.com/SGrondin/bottleneck)
- Takes optional `maxRequests` & `pageSize` URL query params (Airtable limits the latter to 100)
- Fetch a specific page of records by adding an optional `/:pg` param (0-indexed) after the `api/list` endpoint
- Takes `modifiedAfter` or `createdAfter` URL query params to fetch records modified or created after a specified date/time
- Supply a list of space-separated IP addresses with optional wildcards (e.g. 255.255.\*.\*) in your dotenv or elsewhere and limit access to endpoints by passing included middleware
- Sync updates you download from Airtable with a Zotero library.

I will probably not update the guts too much more after the last item above, because this is meant to be a lightweight solution and it already works well and soon will fulfill all my own requirements.

## Pre-configured Endpoints
I built this for my own needs, and the following are the endpoints I use, but these can be removed or adapted to your own needs for any Airtable implementation alone, or with additional synchronization to Zotero, as I do.

### `GET` /esovdb/videos/list/:pg?
Retrieves a list of records from a specified table (optional view) on Airtable, page by page, as Airtable requires, using [`bottleneck`](https://github.com/SGrondin/bottleneck) to avoid rate-limiting, and sends the final result of all requested records as JSON. All requests are cached (cache expiration is parameterized) using the server's file system, according to the structure of the query and any additional URL params. The `/:pg?` parameter, as indicated, is optional, and allows you to query a specific page of the results, skipping all others.Gets

**Additional URL Query Params:**
- `maxRequests` – Synonymous with the Airtable API's `maxRequests` param—limits the total results returned. (default: all records)
- `pageSize` – Synonymous with the Airtable API's `pageSize` param—the number of records to return with each paged request to the Airtable API.  Airtable limits this to 100 per page. (default: 100 records)
- `modifiedAfter` – Creates a `filterByFormula` param in the Airtable API request that retrieves records modified after a certain date (most date strings work, uses `Date.parse()`)
- `createdAfter` – Creates a `filterByFormula` param in the Airtable API request that retrieves records created after a certain date (most date strings work, uses `Date.parse()`)

### `POST` /esovdb/:table/update
Creates one or more records on a specified `table` on Airtable (e.g. `/esovdb/videos/create` is the endpoint you'd use to create a new video).  The body of this post request should be an array of objects formatted as per the Airtable API spec:
```javascript
[
  { 
    fields: {
      'Airtable Field': 'value',
      ...
    }
  },
  ...
]
```
Processes as many records as you give it in batches of 50, as Airtable requires, using [`bottleneck`](https://github.com/SGrondin/bottleneck) to avoid rate-limiting.

### `PUT` /esovdb/:table/update
Updates one or more records on a specified `table` on Airtable (e.g. `/esovdb/videos/update` is the endpoint you'd use to update an existing video).  The body of this post request should be an array of objects formatted as per the Airtable API spec:
```javascript
[
  { 
    id: 'recordID',
    fields: {
      'Airtable Field': 'value',
      ...
    }
  },
  ...
]
```
Processes as many records as you give it in batches of 50, as Airtable requires, using [`bottleneck`](https://github.com/SGrondin/bottleneck) to avoid rate-limiting.

### `POST` /zotero
Adds items to a Zotero Library, 50 at a time, at a maximum of 6/min, which is the Zotero API's limit.  I use this endpoint combined with Airtable's automations feature to automatically add items to the public ESOVDB Zotero library every time a new record is created in Airtable.  My implementation further back-syncs the newly created item in Zotero with the originating table in Airtable, so that each record in Airtable has a Zotero key and version that I can use to track updates later.  Additionally, the public ESOVDB library on Zotero contains topic and series subcollections, for each topic and series in the ESOVDB–these are automatically created when this endpoint is hit with a new series (the list of ESOVDB topics isn't changing), and videos with existing series get filed into their correct topic and series subcollections.

**Sample Airtable Script for Automation**

*Note: when using Airtable's automations, you will have to set up your input.config() object to match all the fields you want to send in the Airtable script below*

```javascript
/**
 *  @trigger Videos › onCreateRecord
 *  @desc Syncs added record on Zotero via ESOVDB proxy server and then syncs back to ESOVDB with assigned key and version
*/

const data = input.config();

if (data.status === 'active') {
    const record = {
        title: data.title,
        url: data.url,
        year: data.year,
        desc: data.desc,
        runningTime: data.runningTime,
        format: data.format,
        topic: data.topic,
        learnMore: data.learnMore,
        series: data.series,
        seriesCount: data.seriesCount,
        vol: data.vol,
        no: data.no,
        publisher: data.publisher,
        presentersFirstName: data.presenterFn,
        presentersLastName: data.presenterLn,
        language: data.language,
        location: data.location,
        plusCode: data.plusCode,
        provider: data.provider,
        esovdbId: data.esovdbid,
        recordId: data.id,
        accessDate: data.isoAdded,
        created: data.created,
        modified: data.modified
    };

    let response = await fetch('https://your-proxy-server.com/zotero', {
        method: 'POST',
        body: JSON.stringify(record),
        headers: {
            'Content-Type': 'application/json',
        },
    });

    if (response.status === 200) {
        console.log('Successfully added item to Zotero and synced version on ESOVDB.');
    } else {
        console.error('Error adding item to Zotero or syncing version on ESOVDB.')
    }
}
```

### `PUT` /zotero
Exactly the same as `POST`, functionally, but the separate endpoint lets me log different types of requests for my own records.  Adds items to a Zotero Library, 50 at a time, at a maximum of 6/min, which is the Zotero API's limit.  I use this endpoint combined with Airtable's automations feature to automatically add items to my Zotero library every time a new record is created in Airtable.  My implementation further back-syncs the newly created item in Zotero with the originating table in Airtable, so that each record in Airtable has a Zotero key and version that I can use to track updates later.

**Sample Airtable Script for Automation**
*Note: when using Airtable's automations, you will have to set up your input.config() object to match all the fields you want to send in the Airtable script below*

```javascript
/**
 *  @trigger Videos › onUpdateRecord
 *  @desc Syncs updated record on Zotero via ESOVDB proxy server and then syncs back to ESOVDB with new version
*/

const data = input.config();

if (data.status === 'active') {
    const record = {
        zoteroKey: data.zoteroKey,
        zoteroVersion: data.zoteroVersion,
        title: data.title,
        url: data.url,
        year: data.year,
        desc: data.desc,
        runningTime: data.runningTime,
        format: data.format,
        topic: data.topic,
        learnMore: data.learnMore,
        series: data.series,
        seriesCount: data.seriesCount,
        vol: data.vol,
        no: data.no,
        publisher: data.publisher,
        presentersFirstName: data.presenterFn,
        presentersLastName: data.presenterLn,
        language: data.language,
        location: data.location,
        plusCode: data.plusCode,
        provider: data.provider,
        esovdbId: data.esovdbid,
        recordId: data.id,
        accessDate: data.isoAdded,
        created: data.created,
        modified: data.modified
    };

    let response = await fetch('https://your-proxy-server.com/zotero', {
        method: 'PUT',
        body: JSON.stringify(record),
        headers: {
            'Content-Type': 'application/json',
        },
    });

    if (response.status === 200) {
        console.log('Successfully updated item on Zotero and synced version on ESOVDB.');
    } else {
        console.error('Error updating item on Zotero or syncing version on ESOVDB.')
    }
}
```

MIT
Copyright (c) 2020-2021 Avana Vana
